In this lecture, you'll learn about IPv6 global unicast addresses. The different types of addresses
we've got in IPv6 are global unicast, unique local and link local.
We'll cover unique local and link local in a later lecture in this section. This lecture, we're going
to focus on global unicast. So global unicast,
the adresses are similar to IPv4 public addresses. Meaning not private addresses.
It is an IPv4 public address or it's publicly reachable that was assigned by the Internet authorities.
So global unicast addresses in IPv6 are equivalent to that.
They're assigned to an individual host and have global reachability everywhere on the Internet unless
blocked by security policy like on a firewall.
And they're assigned from the range 2000::/3.
The Internet authorities assigned blocks from the overall 2000::/3 range to different
organizations that need to communicate on the Internet.
And a common assignment for a company is a /48 block. For example,
2001:10:10::/48. So the example is a company has applied through its service provider for a block
of IP addresses and they were given that. So normally it will be a /48, but a smaller or a larger
size block can be assigned depending on the size of the company.
So larger company can get more addresses.
A smaller company will get less addresses.
And if you're using IPv6 at home, just yourself, individually, you'll be given a /64, which
will be assigned by DHCP typically.
The reason that an individual would be assigned to /64 is that the IPv6 standards state
that addresses aassigned to individual hosts should use a /64 mask.
So it doesn't just applied to you at home.
Every organization everywhere as well.
Even when they're using a large block of addresses for their individual hosts, every individual host
should use a /64.
It's not like an IPv4 where we can be using a /24, or a /16, or a /30 on point to
point links, for example.
Everywhere we're expected to use a /64.
Now the IPv6 address is 128 bits long.
So /64 splits in half.
Half of the address is going to be the network portion and the other half is the host portion.
And if a company is assigned a /48 address by the Internet authoritiy, which is common and uses
/64 host addresses, which is what they're supposed to do, that leaves 16 bits that the company
can use to assign to its internal subnets through its different links.
For example, if the company was assigned 2001:10:10::/48, by the
Internet authorities, then that leaves subnets 2001:10:10:0::/64
2001:10:10:FFFF::/64 to be available to be assigned to its internal network segments.
So they've got 16 bits that they can play with for dividing up the largest, the larger /48 block
into smaller subnet. 16 bits means 65535 possible subnets.
That should be plenty for most situations.
That also leaves us 64 bits left over for the host address.
And you can see the number on the slide here.
It's a huge amount of host that you could have in the one subnet.
You're never going to get up to anywhere near that kind of number.
And if you look at the last bullet point in the slide here, you can see a common way that the IPv6
address is going to be divided up, that the first three hextets are the overall /48 block that was
assigned to the company. The next, the fourth hextet, is going to be divided up into different subnets
and the last four hextets are what is assigned to the individual host.
So we've got an example here where a company has been assigned a /48 block,
2001:DB8:0::/48. So that fourth hextet is what we're going to use for each of their different subnets.
And you can see the example here on the link between R1 and R2, that subnet 2001:DB8:0:1::/64.
The link between R2 and R3 is 2001:DB8:0:2::/64.
If you look below R1 on its fa2/0 interface, that's 2001:DB8:0:0::/64 and on the link
going down from R3 on its fa2/0 interface, that's 2001:DB8:0:3::/64.
So you can see that here, first organization,
all of our IPv6 addresses everywhere begin with 2001:DB8:0. That was the /48 block
that they were assigned.
The next hextets, well the first subnet is 0.
The next subnet is 1. The next one is 2 and so on, and so on.
They're still going to make sure that when they allocate those subnets, that they do it in contiguous
blocks because that's going to help with the summarization that they're going to configure on their
routers.
OK.
Next thing is we're going to have to configure IP addresses on the hosts as well.
So on that link between R1 and R2, on the R1 side, on its fa0/0 interface, we give
it IP address 2001:DB8:0:1::/64, which is the subnet and in the host address, 0:0:0:1.
On the link between R2 and R3, on the R3 side on its fa1/0 interface,
we've given it IP Address 2001:DB8:0:2:0:0:0:1.
So you can see how the IPv6 address works here.
We're also going to take that on a stage as well because we're going to do the address shortening.
So we're going to remove that contiguous blocks of zeros.
So again, that same interface on R1, fa0/0 interface,
it gets IP address 2001:DB8:0:1::1/64.
That's just another way of writing the address that you saw earlier where we've stripped out those contiguous
blocks of zeros and we just write it as a ::1 at the end.
So that was the address on R1. The address on R3 on its
fa1/0 interface is 2001:DB8:0:2 for the subnet,
::1.
If you have a look on the other side to that link on R2's fa1/0 interface,
it would get IP address 2001:DB8:0:2 because it's on the same subnet, and then
::2. So the host portion of the address is different and that we're going to have connectivity
between all of our different hosts that you see in the diagram there.
Now, using a /64 for all network subnets, including point-to-point links and loopback addresses,
can seem wasteful and in IPv4, you don't do that
definitely, if you were using actual public IP addresses. In IPv4, it's pretty standard that we use
a /30 four point-to-point links because that gives us an address on one side, an address on
the other side. For loopback addresses, it's standard that we use a /32. But in IPv6, you don't
do that.
You always used /64 everywhere.
Old school engineers can have a bit of a problem with this because we've had it drummed into us for
years that we don't waste the addresses.
But for IPv6, the official line of thought for me is, that there is that many addresses, that it doesn't
matter if you if you waste huge chunks of them.
So it's recommended, use /64 everywhere.
That simplifies the overall addressing plan and it also enables the use of EUI-64 addresses that you're
going to learn about later in this section.
So how do we actually configure this? First thing that we need to do is to enable IPv6 routing with
the IPv6 unicast in command. But actually, it's probably about time to wrap up this lecture.
So let's do the configuration in the next lecture where I would also show you how to do it in the lab.